Seabird Salad: Patterns in
island vegetation
&
seabird nest sites
================
by Finn O'Connor and Ellie Jackson

## Summary

There are thousands of islands in the Gulf of Maine, many of which host seabird nesting colonies. This past summer, Finn pre-generated random fields plots on four islands---Great Duck, Schoodic, Shabby, and Heron. He selected points within the seabird colonies to collect data on the vegetation present. In this data we have observations of individuals plants, including data on species, height class and percent cover of plot, and vegetation type, along with date and gps location. We also aquired seabird nest location associated with species from John Anderson and Wriley Hodge. Many other students assisted them in collecting these data last spring and summer. 

This project is exploring whether or not vegetation structure and seabird nesting distribution have a statistically relevant correlation. This dataset is meant to guide future research efforts in predicting colony structure change under climate change and sea-level rise. 

To visualize the seabird nests and vegetation plots on each island, we created a Leaflet map. On the map you can see vegetation plots with black outlines. The lighter orange points are the lowest height class, and the color gets darker all the way to red for the tallest height classes. The other circle markers represent seabird nests, light blue for herring gulls, dark pink for eider ducks, and dark blue for great black-backed gulls. At this initial stage of mapping, and without statistics, there is no obvious pattern between vegetation structure and species. Shabby shows the most promise for a potential pattern. The species are fairly grouped on the island, and there appears to be more eiders around the higher vegetation. This is an initial observation that needs to be confirmed by statistics. 

To begin analysing the seabird data, we visualized the populations of different species on each of the islands. You can see in this visualization that GDI has the highest population of seabirds. Then we looked at the proportion of each species on the islands independently of overall population. You can see here that Heron island only has herring gulls. In reality, this island has other species, but the data we revieved was only labeled herrring gull, so we had to assume we didn't have the other points. We did get this other data from Wriley, but by then we didn't have time to integrate it into our data set. 

The first vegetation bar plot shows the number of individuals of a species found on each island. With many species, the graph is not ideal for seeing how many of a specific species was on each island. But this does give a good idea of differences in species richness across the island. You can also see that the specific species on each island were highly variable, so we decided to work with the overall structure indicators rather than the individual species.
To see how these structures compared across islands, we created proportion bar plots for percent cover, height class, and vegetation type. The percent cover was the approximate percentage of the entire plot that was covered by vegetation. You can see that Shabby was about 50% in the highest percent cover range (75-100%) while the other three islands were around 75% in this high range. Based on Finn’s data, Shabby has the most bare area. 

The height classes were general classifications of the overall height of vegetation in a plot. Schoodic is the only island to have any plots above 1.5 meters. Most plots on all islands were a meter or less, and Heron didn’t have any vegetation over a meter.

The vegetation types are currently a rough estimate as Finn continues to classify individual species in the data. Right now every island has at least one of every plant type, although Schoodic has very few vines, and Heron and Shabby have very few shrubs.


Write-up of your project and findings go here. Think of this as the text
of your presentation. The length should be roughly 5 minutes when read
out loud. Although pacing varies, a 5-minute speech is roughly 750
words. To use the word count addin, select the text you want to count
the words of (probably this is the Summary section of this document, go
to Addins, and select the `Word count` addin). This addin counts words
using two different algorithms, but the results should be similar and as
long as you’re in the ballpark of 750 words, you’re good! The addin will
ignore code chunks and only count the words in prose.

You can also load your data here and present any analysis results /
plots, but I strongly urge you to keep that to a minimum (maybe only the
most important graphic, if you have one you can choose). And make sure
to hide your code with `echo = FALSE` unless the point you are trying to
make is about the code itself. Your results with proper output and
graphics go in your presentation, this space is for a brief summary of
your project.

## Presentation

Our presentation can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1M6fcpR2NsUJx6NhD0wOSrRjE4pYKNQ9C6cAKCZGzSFg/edit?usp=sharing).

## Data

O'Connor, F 2023, _Title_, College of the Atlantic.

Hodge, W, Anderson, J 2023, _Title_, College of the Altlantic.

Include a citation for your data here. See
<http://libraryguides.vu.edu.au/c.php?g=386501&p=4347840> for guidance
on proper citation for datasets. If you got your data off the web, make
sure to note the retrieval date.

## References

List any references here. You should, at a minimum, list your data
source.
